Today was pretty wild. A lot of bugs, fixes and realizations.
The most fun one was definitely the usleep(), I have realized that my setup where I take argv input and make that the argument for usleep which will sleep for that amount of time between each packet was good. But then I implemented it and realized that there is like no difference between 0,1,5 and 10 us. So I have dug deeper and realized that's because it is a syscall and calling usleep (surprisingly) puts the thread to sleep. But even when i call usleep(0), it still pretty much the same time as sleep 1 or 2 since the syscall takes more than the actual sleep time (probably like 1-2.5us?) which isn't very precise. So I first thought of putting it in an if statement, but that still doesn't solve that I'm getting 2.5us extra latency for any nonzero inputs. It's either really fast or 3us per packet which is much slower. So i implemented a busy loop which just idle loops for a certain amount of time measured with rdtsc which counts the literal clock cycles. I also use mm_pause which apparently exists for this literal purpose, to inform the cpu its just idle spinning which reduces some predictive capabilities of the CPU which greatly helps since the CPU has a queue for the things it will do next and if the status-quo changes it has to flush that queue which takes a lot of unnecessary time.
I have also realized just how slow is the network stack and the generally the system of using TCP/UDP. I hope I can optimize this to the best especially limiting the amount of overhead it creates on the exchange side with creating all the headers and packaging it up to send which I have partially solved with bundling the packets up into a big packet that has more than 1 message inside. This way I do the whole packaging process only once on the exchange side and then the engine also doesn't have to strip headers and do checks for each message but only for the bundle. On the other hand this introduces jitter proportional to the size of the bundle since the exchange will wait for it to fill up before sending which makes the packets arrive in quanta instead of one by one.
The main thing that maps to like everything that was slow and could be made faster is that context switches and with that syscalls are incredibly slow, change the privilege level doing something on the kernel side and then switching back is very undesirable since it paralyses the system for the time it takes to switch. This applies to printing, sleeping, network stack, literally everything.
That's why one of the next things is also implementing that instead of actually printing the data inside the program I can just write it to a buffer and then print it out with a separate thread doing all the syscalls.
I have also found out that TCP can package multiple of my packets by itself which then made my engine skip some of them since I thought I am maxing out the limit, therefore I have implemented a loop to scan through the whole buffer instead of just taking the first packet. I have found this out when looking at the userrefnums of my ACK logs that should print out all the EnterOrder packets I have sent.
Another really interesting thing was how EPOLLET works. Normally, epoll will continuously inform about the status of the things we are listening to but we can set an option for it to tell us only once which does increase our responsibility but if managed correctly greatly increases performance since getting informed is a syscall.
Exploring the inner workings of epoll was also great to see since I got the experience how it manages multiple incoming streams. My code scans the queue of UDP and when it returns EAGAIN it goes to the next, which is TCP. But when the exchange is too fast at sending packets the UDP queue is receiving at a faster rate than it is emptying itself out which makes it get stuck at UDP and never check TCP which means I just drop the packets. This can be partially resolved by using a set limit of how many packets I read from a source before going to the next one which can reduce the change of the buffer getting rewritten but if the data is coming in too fast even this does not help.
It is also very important and at the start pretty unintuitive that TCP is a stream compared to UDP which is atomic. It sends the packet and the packet either arrives or it doesn't. With TCP it doesn't work like that, since it is 1 on 1, there are no packets, it is a literal stream of data (conceptually, there are still packets on the ethernet level), since the exchange can push the data into the actual ethernet and only a part of it will fit because of the MTU (maximum transmission unit) which I think of as the width of the pipe and the next part will be in the next actual packet, for TCP it's the same since it doesn't care about packets, it just divides outgoing data as it fits and calls it a stream. When the whole message is not there yet because it got split by TCP to 2 different ethernet packets and the NIC still didn't receive the second one or put it in its ring buffer.(this is apparently called stream coalescing) Therefore, we need to check if we have the whole packet, which was easy since I simplified the TCP connection to send only EnterOrder and Accepted packets so I just check if the size fits and if it's smaller I save it into a buffer and load from the buffer when the size is big enough. Otherwise I would have to check the message type and compare the sizes based on that. Fortunately that is not a big problem just an extra helper.