on 16th of february the SolarFlare SN7122F has finally arrived. Bought it on ebay for 20 bucks. I thought it would be so easy to set up and everything will be great, since after all, that's what it's made for right? But I was so wrong. First I have realized that the trade of linux where you get much more flexibility and power is not that amazing because it also means much more responsibility. This is especially true for legacy hardware like my card which dropped support years ago. First I did a bit of research like I'm used to but thought it was gonna be pretty easy so I didn't give it much thought and found the thing that got my card in the documentation, downloaded it and, with the help of AI, learnt to operate it and work with it. So I went to the page, downlaoded my drivers and tried to install them. This seemed to work smoothly even on modern Ubuntu but the when I tried to actually use the ef_vi and bypass capability which is the main thing for me in the enterprise drivers. There is also a normal sfc driver included in the linux kernel but that doesn't allow for a bypass. So, after doing some diagnostics I realized I might have a version of the Onload driver that's too new and that's where all the realizations that I would be battling for the next literal days started hitting. I realized I need an older version of the drivers, that requires an older version of the kernel. So I did that and thought it was a minor struggle and it's gonna be fine. But then I installed them and it still didn't work, so I looked into it and the first tip was to update the firmware. So I just did that. This is done with a tool called sfupdate which has access to the MC (Memory Controller) of the card and can flash firmware and do other fun things. But the problem was sfupdate is not that smart and can actually corrupt the MC if the user is not careful (foreshadowing). So I was doing so many flashes and reinstallations, getting to kernel 4.x and ubuntu 16 while searching for other sfupdate versions (packaged in the sfutils iso) trying to do the flashes and generally just not succeeding. At that point I wasn't even trying the drivers since the new goal was to figure out why is everything so clunky.
The the probably biggest thing hit me. I was troubleshooting at like 2am after sitting at it for over 12 hours and I realized that the firmware version shown by sfupdate is 4 versions different from the one shown in ethtool. So I went down the rabbithole, searching through all the very limited resources on my 4.x.x version of firmware from about 2015 until I found out that the card actually had a change in how the memory is managed to a more dynamic layout. These two are incompatible. This had even less documentation than anything previous, at that point I have decided that having a mismatched firmware version is probably bad (yeah, crazy thought right?) so I found a super old lenovo, also around 2015 version of sfutils running old TinyCore and just flashed the card everytime I inevitable failed at making it work. I thought this kinda resets my process at bricking it so that I can experiment and do more dangerous things. It also helped a lot that the card was $20 so it was not that big of a sunk cost if I just bricked it.
At this point I had about 6 bootable USBs (before, it was 1 running ventoy but then it came to my attention that it can break legacy systems because its basically a wrapper for the iso, it doesnt actually load it fully and does some other shady things which might be incompatible) with different bootable sfutils versions (3 of them), like 3 other ones with different ubuntu versions most of them with multiple kernels since I needed the right one and it usually shipped with the one that automatically upgrades the kernel and it was going nowhere. This is about 20 hours in. So out of pure desperation I drafted and sent an email to AMD NIC support and kept on going deeper with more flashing, downloading shady MEGA .ISOs from AMD forums and generally just trying to guess because it's not like there is any real documentation that matches reality. The original newest AMD driver was supposed to have my firmware upgrade too but running that might've been my biggest mistake since apparently there is like a migration tool or you're supposed to use at least version of sfutils right after the change to the new memory layout so it's not too out of touch, of which me and my limited experience didn't have the slightest clue for most of the process. But still, it was pretty fun, I was learning, it was cool new and also enterprise, superfast hardware with all the fancy tools and things I could use later so I was fine.
Then the flashing started failing. I have no idea how doing one thing 10 times can be fine but for the eleventh time it will break it but that might just be my lack of understanding (probably running a command a bit differently or doing things in a bad order or whatever). So at that point sfupdate wasn't speaking with me at all on the newer version. Before that it at least tried to flash the card and probably silently failed since it never updated. My theory at that point was that the MC is receiving the data but not actually pushing it onto the ROM which might have been set to read only by some safety mechanism against people that have no idea what they are doing like me so they don't brick the card completely. But them, even the MC started failing and the only environment it communicated in was the oldest TinyCore sfupdate from 2015.
There, I could run sfupdate and try to flash it which would be successfull but it did not actually flash it I think since the MC was probably corrupted and the memory in some protected mode. So I could flash it but the MC wouldn't actually push it. Then I have also found out that another part of sfutils, sfboot, which is supposed to display info about the card and is more of a monitoring thing afaik can't read the card. This was happening both in the new 6.x and newer versions of sfutils, but also in the old TinyCore one. Both gave the option to try to repair the card and in the latter (TinyCore) it did actually work, but when I ran the command immediatelly after repairing again, it was still corrupted. Also, a really cool thing about all this flashing and troubleshooting was me learning about just how important it might be to clear the volatile memory holding the current firmware by unplugging it or at least turning of the PC since it still gets powered from the PCIe bus.
The latest state is basically what I described. I have come to the conclusion that there is no way I'll be able to fix the card (the AMD support email also didn't help, they basically said that my card is old, no shit). So the card has the legacy 2015 firmware which disables cool features I wanted to try out like CTPIO but more importantly the drivers are only compatible with certain versions of firmware and mine will be lucky to work with like a 2018 one which doesnt run on newer kernels which dont run on new ubuntus so I will either use something like DPDK which should entirely bypass this thing and just use the card raw, or I settle with the old drivers on like ubuntu 18 and try to do ef_vi which was the original plan.
Another really cool thing was generally learning how my motherboard is layouted in practice and how things like pcie bifurcation work. It was throwing an error (like 10 of them but this sounded fixable) about the card only having access to 4 pcie lanes even though it was in a 16x port so I investigated and found out that the 16x port on some motherboards is not a 16x port at all but just a fancy 4x or 8x port. The motherboard doesn't physically have enough lanes so they just route less lanes into the second port since most users dont have 2 truly 16x devices, at least not in this price category. So I wanted it to get at least more bandwith since it seemed like a pretty solvable issue. I have found out that it might be the MOBO diverting some of the lanes to an NVME ssd or other things, this is called bifurcation of the bus. So I turned that off and it still didn't work so I read the documentation for my MOBO and found out that there are just 4 lanes going to the second port and that's it's never gonna work. Also, the second port goes to the bridge before going to the cpu which just adds extra things on the way. So I just put my GPU in the second port and this in the main port connected right in the GPU and that was that.
